Polymer
Chemistry
COMMUNICATION
Cite this: Polym. Chem., 2020, 11,
4968
Received 6th June 2020,
Accepted 15th July 2020
DOI: 10.1039/d0py00823k
rsc.li/polymers
Tailoring polymer dispersity by mixing chain
transfer agents in PET-RAFT polymerization†
Kostas Parkatzidis,
‡a Nghia P. Truong,
‡a Maria Nefeli Antonopoulou,a
Richard Whitﬁeld,
a Dominik Konkolewicz
b and Athina Anastasaki
*a
Here we report a simple and versatile batch methodology to tailor
polymer dispersity utilizing PET-RAFT polymerization. By mixing
two chain transfer agents (CTAs) possessing diﬀerent transfer con-
stants (a higher and a lower transfer constant CTA) in diﬀerent
ratios, control over the dispersity (Đ = 1.08–1.82) can be achieved
for a range of monomer classes including methacrylates, acrylates
and acrylamides while maintaining monomodal molecular weight
distribution. The high end-group ﬁdelity of both low and high dis-
persity macroCTAs was conﬁrmed by the synthesis of block copo-
lymers. In contrast to previously developed photo-mediated meth-
odologies, we show that PET-RAFT exhibits perfect temporal
control for all targeted dispersities regardless of the percentage of
the lower transfer constant CTA employed. Other beneﬁts of the
approach include the use of visible light irradiation, ppm concen-
trations of a photo-redox catalyst and the possibility to manipulate
Đ in the absence of external deoxygenation methodologies, which
signiﬁcantly simplify the process.
Reversible deactivation radical polymerization (RDRP) has sig-
nificantly contributed to the evolution of modern polymer
chemistry by providing access to
a range of
polymeric
materials with controlled molecular weight, architecture, func-
tionality and dispersity (Đ) from a range of functional
groups.1–4 In particular, Đ (as a measure of the breadth of the
molecular weight distribution) is an important parameter to
control as it determines the polymer properties.5,6 For many
years, the main target of RDRP methodologies was the syn-
thesis of low Đ polymers while materials of higher Đ were con-
sidered less desirable and often associated with low living-
ness.7 However, a number of studies have recently revealed
that both low and high Đ polymers possess interesting and
complementary properties and as such developing new strat-
egies to tailor molecular weight distribution is highly desirable
and a current challenge in polymer chemistry.8,9 The tra-
ditional method to tune polymer dispersity is blending of pre-
synthesized polymers of diﬀerent molecular weights.10–13
Despite the simplicity of this method and the possibility to
obtain a wide range of Đs, it can be time-consuming and often
leads to multimodal molecular weight distribution. In 2016,
Fors and co-workers reported an elegant engineering approach
to tune molecular weight distribution, whereby the relative
rate of initiation to propagation was controlled through
gradual feeding of an initiator during the nitroxide mediated
polymerization of styrene yielding materials with various
Đs.14–16 The same approach was also successfully applied to
anionic
polymerization.17
In
an
alternative
methodology,
Boyer, Xu and co-workers cleverly controlled the molecular
weight distribution through flow polymerization by carefully
adjusting the flow rates, chemical compositions and residence
times.18,19 More recently, Goto’s group developed an innovative
temperature selective method where diﬀerent amounts of
butyl acrylate were added during the reversible complexation
mediated polymerization of methyl methacrylate, achieving
good control over the dispersity of a range of architectures.20
In another report, Matyjaszewski and co-workers eﬃciently
tuned the catalyst concentration in atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP) to aﬀord polymers with tailored Đs.21
Other examples to tailor polymer dispersity include the use of
reducing agents, photochromic initiators, flow chemistry and
termination agents.22–26 Despite the well-recognized benefits
of utilizing light as an external stimulus (e.g. wide availability,
non-invasiveness etc.),27–30 perfect temporal control for a wide
range of targeted Đs has not been demonstrated by any photo-
polymerization method.31–34 For instance, in photo-ATRP,
complete cessation of the polymerization in the absence of
light irradiation could only be achieved for very high dispersity
values (Đ ∼1.80), while for lower and intermediate Đs, imper-
fect temporal control has been reported.32,35 RAFT, on the
†Electronic supplementary
information (ESI)
available: Experimental pro-
cedures, detailed polymerization results, and SEC and NMR data. See DOI:
10.1039/d0py00823k
‡These authors contributed equally to the work.
aLaboratory of Polymeric Materials, Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, Vladimir-
Prelog-Weg 5, Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: athina.anastasaki@mat.ethz.ch
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056,
USA
4968 | Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4968–4972
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Published on 15 July 2020. Downloaded by Thueringer Universitats Landesbibliothek Jena on 5/23/2025 9:23:38 AM.
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue



other hand, can exhibit perfect temporal control for low Đs but
the capability of the technique to maintain excellent temporal
control for intermediate and high Đs has not been explored. In
addition, broadening the molecular weight distribution often
leads to disagreement between theoretical and experimental
molecular
weights,
which
has
been
attributed
to
slow
initiation in ATRP.32 It is also noted that in many methods,
multimodal molecular weight distribution and low end-group
fidelity compromise the potential applications of the resulting
materials.25,36 Last but not least, the vast majority of reported
strategies require tedious external deoxygenation, e.g. freeze–
pump–thaw cycles, nitrogen bubbling, etc. We envisaged that
we could address many of the aforementioned issues by com-
bining the benefits of photoinduced electron transfer revers-
ible
addition–fragmentation
chain
transfer
(PET-RAFT)
polymerization with a recent publication from our group
where traditional thermal RAFT polymerization was employed
to tailor polymer Đs by mixing diﬀerent chain transfer
agents.37 Key to this mixing approach is the selection of two
suitable CTAs with diﬀerent transfer constants, of which the
one with the higher transfer constant would aﬀord polymers
with low Đ and that with the lower transfer constant would
lead to broader molecular weight distribution. The two
selected CTAs would be then mixed in various ratios to allow
the synthesis of polymers exhibiting a wide range of Đs. If suc-
cessful, our work would represent the first example of a batch
PET-RAFT methodology where polymer Đ can be tailored on
demand. Additional benefits would arise from the possibility
to achieve perfect temporal control for any targeted dispersity,
the use of visible light irradiation and ppm concentrations of
the catalyst as well as the opportunity to conduct the reactions
in the absence of any external deoxygenation. It is noted that
our mixed RAFT agent system is fundamentally diﬀerent from
the mixed ligand system previously employed by Percec and
co-workers in copper-mediated polymerizations where an
acceleration of the polymerization rate was observed (rather
than a change in the attained dispersity).38,39 A list of all
reagents employed in this study is presented in Scheme 1. To
explore the possibility of PET-RAFT polymerization to tailor
polymer dispersity in batches, methyl methacrylate (MMA) was
used as a model monomer, Eosin Y (EY) as a photo-redox cata-
lyst and DMSO as a solvent, following the pioneering work by
Boyer and co-workers, using blue light LED irradiation (12 W,
λmax = 465 ± 5 nm) in a homemade box (Fig. S1†).40,41 4-Cyano-
4-(phenylcarbonothioylthio)pentanoic
acid
(CTA
1)
was
selected as a high transfer constant CTA (Scheme 1), because it
is a widely used CTA to polymerize methacrylate monomers
owing to the stabilization of the intermediate radical oﬀered
by the phenyl Z group.
Indeed, polymerization of MMA under the aforementioned
conditions led to well-defined PMMA with narrow molecular
weight distribution (Đ ∼1.10, Mn = 22 700) (Fig. 1a, Table S1†
entry 5). Instead, the selection of the low transfer constant CTA
is much more challenging. To select a suitably low transfer
constant CTA, the following three main criteria were con-
sidered. Firstly, the chosen CTA should allow for the synthesis
of polymers of suﬃciently high Đ (>1.5 to resemble values typi-
cally obtained during free radical polymerization). Secondly, it
should allow monomodal molecular weight distribution to be
targeted while maintaining high livingness. Last but not least,
an “ideal” low transfer constant CTA should not compromise
the agreement between theoretical and experimental mole-
cular weights or lead to slow polymerization. To satisfy these
requirements, 2-cyanobutan-2-yl 4-chloro-3,5-dimethyl-1H-pyr-
azole-1-carbodithioate (CTA 2) was selected as the low transfer
constant CTA. By using CTA 2 to polymerize MMA, fairly
broad, yet monomodal, molecular weight distribution was
achieved (Đ ∼1.72) (Fig. 1a, Table S1† entry 1). By varying the
ratio between CTA 1 and CTA 2, any intermediate Đ could be
obtained (Đ ∼1.08–1.72) (Fig. 1a and S2,† Tables S1 and 2†).
For instance, when 70% of high transfer constant CTA 1 and
30% of low transfer constant CTA 2 were mixed, a dispersity of
1.23 could be attained. To target higher dispersity values, the
amount of CTA 2 was increased to 60% and 90%, yielding Đ ∼
1.36 and Đ ∼1.57, respectively (Fig. 1a, Table S1†, entries 2
and 3). Importantly, similar dispersity values could be attained
at diﬀerent monomer concentrations (1 : 1, 1 : 3, 1 : 5 and
1 : 10 monomer to solvent) (Fig. S3†). These initial experiments
demonstrate that by simply mixing 2 commercially available
CTAs, polymers with a range of Đs can be synthesized through
PET-RAFT polymerization. The livingness of the synthesized
materials was subsequently investigated. Upon addition of a
second aliquot of MMA, eﬃcient chain extension could be per-
formed. In particular, a macroCTA with an intermediate dis-
persity (Đ = 1.37, Mn = 10 300) was successfully chain extended
reaching higher molecular weights (Mn = 26 800) and main-
taining a relatively constant dispersity (Đ = 1.33) (Fig. 1b and
S4, S5†). In situ chain extension from the highest dispersity
PMMA synthesized through the exclusive use of CTA 2 was also
possible (Fig. S6†). Importantly, in all cases, fairly good agree-
ment between experimental and theoretical molecular weights
could be maintained (Table S1 and 2†). The preparation of
block copolymers was also possible. Starting from a PMMA
with Đ = 1.37 (Mn = 10 300), a well-defined P(MMA-b-BMA)
could be synthesized with the molecular weight distribution
Scheme 1
Summary of reagents employed in this study.
Polymer Chemistry
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4968–4972 | 4969
Published on 15 July 2020. Downloaded by Thueringer Universitats Landesbibliothek Jena on 5/23/2025 9:23:38 AM.
View Article Online



shifting clearly to higher molecular weights (Mn = 21 400, Đ ∼
1.35) (Fig. 2a and S7†). In a similar vein, a high dispersity
PMMA (Đ ∼1.64) could be eﬃciently chain extended in situ
with methyl vinyl ketone (MVK) yielding a block copolymer
with a final dispersity of 1.50 (Fig. 2b and S8†). These results
highlight that high livingness can be maintained regardless of
the initial dispersity of the macroCTA.
One significant advantage of PET-RAFT polymerization is
the use of visible light as a stimulus to initiate and mediate
the polymerization. To investigate the possibility of temporal
control in our system, “on–oﬀ” experiments were designed and
special emphasis was given to long “oﬀ” periods (i.e. > 10 h) to
ensure accuracy and to eliminate experimental error.42 When
targeting intermediate dispersities (CTA 1 : CTA 2 ∼35 : 65, Đ =
1.24–1.33), our kinetics showed that Mn grows linearly with
conversion and the polymerization can completely cease
during dark periods (Fig. 3a and c). This is in contrast to
photo-ATRP where cessation of polymerization was only poss-
ible at extremely high Đs, while for lower and intermediate Đs,
the reaction continued in the absence of light irradiation,
albeit at a slower rate.32,35 In addition, when targeting higher
Đs through our approach (CTA 2 only, Đ = 1.64–1.72), a non-
linear molecular weight evolution was observed with the Mn
reaching relatively high values at low conversion (Fig. 3d).
Significantly, complete cessation of the polymerization during
the “oﬀ” periods could also be achieved when only CTA 2 was
employed (Fig. 3b), thus demonstrating that PET-RAFT oﬀers
excellent temporal control for the entire range of targeted Đs.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example where
perfect temporal control has been demonstrated for any tar-
geted dispersity.
Fig. 2
SEC analysis of block copolymers formed from (a) mixed CTAs
P(MMA-b-PBMA) and (b) only CTA 2 P(MMA-b-PMVK).
Fig. 3
“ON/OFF” study for PET-RAFT polymerization of MMA: (a) ln
([M]0/[M]t) vs. time of exposure, CTA 1 : CTA 2 ratio 35 : 65%; (b) ln([M]0/
[M]t) vs. time of exposure, only CTA 2; (c) molecular weights and Mw/Mn
vs. conversion, CTA 1 : CTA 2 ratio 35 : 65%; and (d) molecular weights
and Mw/Mn vs. conversion, only CTA 2.
Fig. 1
SEC analysis of the polymerization of MMA, illustrating (a) the variation in dispersity as CTA 1 and CTA 2 are mixed in diﬀerent ratios (aligned
by the Mp value) and (b) a chain extension of a PMMA macroCTA prepared with 10% CTA 1 and 90% CTA 2 with MMA.
Communication
Polymer Chemistry
4970 | Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4968–4972
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Published on 15 July 2020. Downloaded by Thueringer Universitats Landesbibliothek Jena on 5/23/2025 9:23:38 AM.
View Article Online



Oxygen-tolerant polymerizations have recently received con-
siderable attention as they eliminate the laborious task of con-
ventional deoxygenation (e.g. freeze pump–thaw cycles, nitro-
gen bubbling, etc.) oﬀering an inexpensive, fast and simple
way to synthesize polymers without requiring a complex set-up
or extensive training.43–47 In our previous investigation to tune
polymer Đ all experiments were conducted under strict deoxy-
genation conditions using thermal RAFT polymerization.37
However, PET-RAFT oﬀers the opportunity for the polymeriz-
ations to proceed without the need for external deoxygenation.
Indeed, a range of diﬀerent Đs of PMMAs could be obtained
by using mixtures of CTA 1 and CTA 2 in the absence of any
external deoxygenation when the headspace was minimised to
reduce the amount of oxygen present in the reaction vessel
(Fig. S9 and Table S3†). It is highlighted that oxygen-tolerant
polymerizations usually occurred in an ideal fashion when
using DMSO as the solvent.46
To examine the compatibility of our strategy with other
monomer classes, we selected methyl acrylate (MA) as the next
model monomer. Due to the change in monomer activity, a
diﬀerent pair of CTAs was selected. As the high transfer con-
stant CTA, 2-cyano-2-propyl dodecyl trithiocarbonate (CTA 3)
was chosen, yielding PMA with Đ ∼1.11 (Mn = 23 400) (Fig. 4a
and
Table
S4†
entry
5).
2-Cyanopropan-2-yl
N-methyl-N-
(pyridin-4-yl)carbamodithioate (CTA 4) was utilized as the low
transfer constant CTA allowing much broader molecular
weight distribution to be achieved (Đ ∼1.52, Fig. 4a and
Table S4† entry 1). By mixing CTA 3 with CTA 4 in diﬀerent
ratios, any intermediate Đ could be targeted while ensuring
monomodal
distributions
and
good
agreement
between
theoretical and experimental molecular weights (Fig. 4a and
Table S4†). Our strategy was finally extended to acrylamides,
where dimethyl acrylamide (DMA) could be polymerized suc-
cessfully yielding various intermediate Đs upon mixing CTA 3
(Đ
∼
1.10)
with
methyl
2-[methyl(4-pyridinyl)carba-
mothioylthio]propionate (CTA 5) (Đ ∼1.82) (Fig. 4b and
Table S5†). Thus, our methodology demonstrated excellent
compatibility with diﬀerent polymer classes.
In summary, we reported the first example of a batch
PET-RAFT polymerization methodology where excellent tem-
poral control can be achieved for a wide range of targeted Đs.
By mixing two CTAs of diﬀerent transfer constants, tuneable
dispersities (Đ ∼1.08–1.82) can be attained while maintaining
monomodal molecular weight distribution, good agreement
between experimental and theoretical molecular weights and
high livingness. The high end-group fidelity was verified
through chain extensions and block copolymers yielding well-
defined polymeric materials. The developed approach could
also be performed in the absence of any external deoxygena-
tion method, thus significantly simplifying the process and
expanding the chemical toolbox for tuning polymer dispersity.
